Tracing without performance documentation (#7176)
getsentry/sentry-docs: src/platform-includes/distributed-tracing/instrumentation/custom-instrumentation/javascript.mdx

Reviewer: note to self: haven't reviewed yet

Reviewer 2: as this will not be shown for now, and will be reworked when "tracing without performance" was implemented in JS, no need for review now. This is a thing for future us :)

If you are using one of the integrations of Frameworks listed above, **you do not need to do anything** for distributed tracing to work!

You can stop reading this page now and continue building an amazing product.

</Alert>

Please read the note above. If you want to implement distributed tracing "by hand" two things need to be done:

- When loading the page, extract and store incoming tracing information from HTML `meta` tags.
- When doing outgoing requests, inject tracing information to the outgoing request.

To learn more see also: <PlatformLink to="/distributed-tracing/#how-does-distributed-tracing-work-in-sentry">How Does Distributed Tracing Work in Sentry?</PlatformLink>

## Extract Tracing Information From HTML `meta` Tags

This code snipped assumes, that the backend that renders the HTML, injects tracing information into the HTML as `meta` tags.

See for example [Inject Tracing Information Into Rendered HTML](/platforms/python/distributed-tracing/instrumentation/custom-instrumentation/#inject-tracing-information-into-rendered-html) to learn how your backend can inject this information.

On `pageload` do the following:

> ```javascript
> // Read meta tag values

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```javascript
import {
  baggageHeaderToDynamicSamplingContext,
  extractTraceparentData,
} from '@sentry/utils';

function getMetaContent(metaName: string): string | null {
  const metaTag = getDomElement(`meta[name=${metaName}]`);
  return metaTag ? metaTag.getAttribute('content') : null;
}

// Read meta tag values
```

We don't export `getMetaContent` from the SDK yet 😢

Reviewer 2: we decided on not showing the custom instrumentation yet, we will revisit after tracing without performance was implemented in JS

const sentryTraceMetaTagValue = getMetaContent("sentry-trace");
const baggageMetaTagValue = getMetaContent("baggage");

// Extract Sentry trace information
const traceParentData = extractTraceparentData(sentryTraceMetaTagValue);

// Create Dynamic Sampling Context
const dynamicSamplingContext =
  baggageHeaderToDynamicSamplingContext(baggageMetaTagValue);

// Create transaction context
const transactionContext = {
  ...traceParentData,
  metadata: {
    dynamicSamplingContext: dynamicSamplingContext,
  },
};

// Start transaction with tracing information of meta tags

> const pageLoadTransaction = startTransaction(hub, transactionContext);

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
const pageLoadTransaction = Sentry.startTransaction(hub, transactionContext);
```

I believe this is how we recommend doing it more canonically, not entirely sure though. It has the upside of being a bit more describing where `startTransaction` is actually located.

Reviewer 2: we decided on not showing the custom instrumentation yet, we will revisit after tracing without performance was implemented in JS

```

In this example we create a new transaction, that is attached to the trace that was specified in the information in the `sentry-trace` and `baggage` HTML `meta` tags.

## Inject Tracing Information to Outgoing Requests

On outgoing XHR/fetch requests you have to add the two headers `sentry-trace` and `baggage` that you extracted and stored in the `pageLoadTransaction` earlier.

If you are do outgoing requests in another way you can generate the tracing information like follows:

> ```javascript
> // Create `sentry-trace` header

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```javascript
import { dynamicSamplingContextToSentryBaggageHeader } from '@sentry/utils';

// Create `sentry-trace` header
```

Reviewer 2: we decided on not showing the custom instrumentation yet, we will revisit after tracing without performance was implemented in JS

<!--

NOTE

This page is not yet visible in the docs, as the apis used here are not public.
We will implement "Tracing without Performance" for Javascript Browser first,
then revisit this page and change it to match the new official apis to use.

-->

> <Alert title="Note" level="note">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

All Sentry JavaScript SDKs support distributed tracing out of the box if you add the <PlatformLink to="/performance/instrumentation/automatic-instrumentation/">BrowserTracing</PlatformLink> integration to your `Sentry.init` option. The [Next.js](/platforms/javascript/guides/nextjs/) and [SvelteKit](/platforms/javascript/guides/sveltekit/) SDKs already include this integration by default.

If you are using one of the integrations of Frameworks listed above, **you do not need to do anything** for distributed tracing to work!

You can stop reading this page now and continue building an amazing product.

> </Alert>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Please read the note above. If you want to implement distributed tracing "by hand" two things need to be done:
> 
> - When loading the page, extract and store incoming tracing information from HTML `meta` tags.
> - When doing outgoing requests, inject tracing information to the outgoing request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you prefer to implement custom distributed tracing, you must:

- Extract and store incoming tracing information from HTML `meta` tags when loading the page
- Inject tracing information to the outgoing request when sending outgoing requests.
```

> To learn more see also: <PlatformLink to="/distributed-tracing/#how-does-distributed-tracing-work-in-sentry">How Does Distributed Tracing Work in Sentry?</PlatformLink>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn more, see our <PlatformLink to="/distributed-tracing/">Distributed Tracing</PlatformLink> docs.
```

## Extract Tracing Information From HTML `meta` Tags

> This code snipped assumes, that the backend that renders the HTML, injects tracing information into the HTML as `meta` tags.
> 
> See for example [Inject Tracing Information Into Rendered HTML](/platforms/python/distributed-tracing/instrumentation/custom-instrumentation/#inject-tracing-information-into-rendered-html) to learn how your backend can inject this information.
> 
> On `pageload` do the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assuming the backend that renders the HTML has injected tracing information into the HTML as `meta` tags, you can extract that tracing information on `pageload` and use it to create new transactions connected to the incoming trace.

See the docs on how to [Inject Tracing Information Into Rendered HTML](/platforms/python/distributed-tracing/instrumentation/custom-instrumentation/#inject-tracing-information-into-rendered-html) to learn more about how to configure your backend to inject this information.

For example, on `pageload` you could do the following:
```

```javascript
// Read meta tag values
const sentryTraceMetaTagValue = getMetaContent("sentry-trace");
const baggageMetaTagValue = getMetaContent("baggage");

// Extract Sentry trace information
const traceParentData = extractTraceparentData(sentryTraceMetaTagValue);

// Create Dynamic Sampling Context
const dynamicSamplingContext =
  baggageHeaderToDynamicSamplingContext(baggageMetaTagValue);

// Create transaction context
const transactionContext = {
  ...traceParentData,
  metadata: {
    dynamicSamplingContext: dynamicSamplingContext,
  },
};

// Start transaction with tracing information of meta tags
const pageLoadTransaction = startTransaction(hub, transactionContext);
```

> In this example we create a new transaction, that is attached to the trace that was specified in the information in the `sentry-trace` and `baggage` HTML `meta` tags.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we create a new transaction that is attached to the trace specified in the `sentry-trace` and `baggage` HTML `meta` tags.
```

## Inject Tracing Information to Outgoing Requests

> On outgoing XHR/fetch requests you have to add the two headers `sentry-trace` and `baggage` that you extracted and stored in the `pageLoadTransaction` earlier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For distributed tracing to work, the two headers that you extracted and stored in the `pageLoadTransaction`, `sentry-trace` and `baggage`, must be added to outgoing XHR/fetch requests.

Here's an example of how to collect and inject this tracing information to outgoing requests:
```

> If you are do outgoing requests in another way you can generate the tracing information like follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

?

Reviewer 2: What I meant with "in another way" is that if you are not using HTTP as protocol to talk between your service. For example you use some proprietary protocol you invented or some other obscure protocol that has no concept of headers.

Reviewer 2: but I guess it is fine to remove

```javascript
// Create `sentry-trace` header
const sentryTraceHeader = pageLoadTransaction.toTraceparent();

// Create `baggage` header
const dynamicSamplingContext = pageLoadTransaction.getDynamicSamplingContext();
const sentryBaggageHeader = dynamicSamplingContextToSentryBaggageHeader(
  dynamicSamplingContext
);

// Make outgoing request
fetch("https://example.com", {
  method: "GET",
  headers: {
    baggage: sentryBaggageHeader,
    "sentry-trace": sentryTraceHeader,
  },
}).then((response) => {
  // ...
});
```

> Now tracing information is propagated to the project running at `https://example.com`. If it has a Sentry SDK running, it will extract and save the tracing information for later use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, tracing information is propagated to the project running at `https://example.com`. If this project uses a Sentry SDK, it will extract and save the tracing information for later use.
```

The two services are now connected with your custom distributed tracing implementation.

## Verification

> If you make outgoing requests from your project to other services, check if the headers `sentry-trace` and `baggage` are present in the request. If so distributed tracing is working.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you make outgoing requests from your project to other services, check if the headers `sentry-trace` and `baggage` are present in the request. If so, distributed tracing is working.
```
